>> The highly anticipated
mission to Mars is off
to an excellent start, with
a series of record-breaking
firsts.
So what does this mean
for getting humans
to the Red Planet?
This is "Gaia News."
[THEME MUSIC PLAYING]
What began in
February 2021, with
the suspense-filled landing
of the Perseverance Rover
on the Red Planet is now
a mission in full swing.
Within the course
of just a few weeks,
the 4-pound
helicopter, Ingenuity,
the first powered aircraft
on a world beyond Earth,
successfully completed
three flights.
And for the first time ever
on an extraterrestrial planet,
oxygen was created
from carbon dioxide.
Robert Zubrin, former
aerospace engineer, author,
and founder of the Mars
Society, talked to us
about the significance
of these feats.
>> The MOXIE experiment is a
system that takes in Martian
atmosphere, which is
95% carbon dioxide,
and splits it into carbon
monoxide and oxygen,
throws the carbon monoxide
away, but it keeps the oxygen.
And oxygen, of course,
everybody knows,
is essential for life support,
but it's also the majority
of rocket propellant.
If you were, for instance, to
use a SpaceX Starship, which
runs on methane and oxygen, 75%
of that mixture is the oxygen.
So we're literally making rocket
propellant out of the air.
>> Another major milestone of
the mission is the successful
completion of three helicopter
flights, with more to come.
>> Ingenuity is the first
aircraft that has gone to Mars.
And it's the first
powered aircraft
that's gone to any planet.
On Mars, it's very hard to fly.
Martian atmosphere is 1% as
thick as the Earth's atmosphere
at sea level.
They went up, they
traveled 50 yards on Mars,
and they took photographs from
the air, for the first time.
They're going to take this on
ever more aggressive flights.
>> What makes this part of
the mission so significant?
>> The potential of
this is fantastic
because they're rovers.
They can travel 200
yards in a day or so.
This little helicopter
could probably
travel 200 yards in a minute.
Bigger helicopters,
which will follow,
if this thing
continues to work well,
we'll travel 200 miles in a day.
They'll be able to use a
ground-penetrating radar
from the air to look
for underground,
water underground, caverns.
I mean, there's so much more
you can do with an aircraft
than you can with
a ground rover.
>> Just what does this mean
for the possibility of a human
expedition to Mars?
>> Mobility is the key
to effective exploration.
That's what it's all about.
And people like me, who've
designed human Mars missions,
have designed it assuming that
the best mobility we would have
would be ground cars.
But now, what if we can make
helicopters that astronauts
can fly around on Mars?
They'll be as free as birds.
And they will be thousands
of times more effective
as explorers than if they
were restricted to the ground.
>> What's next for this mission?
>> First of all, Ingenuity
is going to continue to fly
and make more and more
aggressive flights.
The Perseverance Rover,
though, is powered
by a radioisotope generator.
It can travel for years.
So therefore, it can be expected
to go at least a decade.
It has a microscope
that it can use
to examine minerals to
see if, in fact, they
might be microfossils
left behind by organisms.
So it can do fossil hunting.
It's going to do
sample gathering.
It has a variety of
other instruments on it.
>> For many like Robert Zubrin,
the real work of searching
for life on Mars will be
done when we get humans
on the planet.
>> Human explorers on Mars have
a much better chance of finding
fossils on Mars.
Going beyond fossils,
finding extinct life on Mars,
will require drilling because
if there's life on Mars today,
it's not at the surface.
The surface has no liquid water.
We set up drills.
We bring up some of the
samples of that water.
We see if there's
life, and we subject
it to biochemical examination.
That's what we need to do to
discover the nature of life
on Mars.
This is something way beyond
the ability of robotic rovers.
This is why we have to send
human explorers to Mars.
If we don't go, we won't know.
>> In the meantime, the hope is
that this mission will get us
one step closer.
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."